Self-Imposed Structure is an application to enhance your productivity by providing structure to your day.  I wrote this app because I have concentration problems, either I concentrate too much (work too many hours and neglect other priorities in my life) or I don't concentrate enough and get distracted by all sorts of web sites that I should instead ignore.  So Self-Imposed Structure is meant to help me maintain the right balance between writing software (or other computer intensive thought-work) and living life.

Organizing your Time
Well the most obvious feature is the Summary Screen that it can pop up.  It greets you when you start your day with a Heads-up Display styled summary dialog listing of your recent emails, upcoming appointments and task-list items.  This feature helps you plan out your day and importantly, it proactively pops up rather than sitting there where you can ignore it.  The display is organized by dates and times so that sooner, more urgent events are at the top of the lists.  Items on the Summary Screen are of course actionable: clicking on a line for a mail message will bring it up in Mail, likewise for calendar entries it brings up iCal. Task-list items have check boxes so that they can be marked complete.  The summary screen can of course, be displayed at any time you want. 

Tracking your Goals
Self-Imposed Structure also tracks your activities during the day. As far as Self-Imposed Structure is concerned during a work day you are either working, free, or away. And if you are working it will track projects and tasks.  The important thing to know is that when you are in the working state it is tracking the hours and will let you know when you have reached your work goal for the day (Part of configuring Self-Imposed Structure is setting a daily work goal).  The status bar icon for Self-Imposed Structure provides a visual indication of whether the time is work or free and it will also change color as work time is accrued so that it starts the day colored red and ends the day colored deep blue.  And it will finally display a growl alert when the work goal is achieved.

Encouraging Productivity and Balance
Self-Imposed Structure attempts to distinguish between work priorities and personal priorities and likewise distinguishes between workdays and weekends. For example, during a workday you can take breaks  by putting yourself in free state, but self-imposed structure will encourage you to start work again after 10 minutes by beginning to issue growl reminders with current tasks that are still outstanding.  Also, when you set up a task list you categorize it as work or personal so that self-imposed structure will not issue reminders about work on weekends or after the work goal for the day is achieved.

Buckling Down
Sometimes there is a task that you really have to struggle with motivation on and for these cases it can help to use a timer to force yourself to "just do it".  Self-Imposed Structure has a timed mode to cover just this situation.  You can set a timer for some period and the status icon will change to show a sweeping clock dial and will play an alarm when you have completed the timed period of work.

Avoiding Distractions and Interruptions
Because Self-Imposed Structure is aware of your work and free time it can help you avoid distractions when you are working. For example Self-Imposed Structure takes on the role of issuing growl alerts when there is incoming mail.  However Self-Imposed Structure can act more intelligently, if you desire, by only showing incoming email during free time.  Or you can set up rules for priorities of incoming email.  In my case, I think emails from my girlfriend are important and so I will always be alerted immediately when her emails arrive.  (as opposed to other emails that will wait until I am in free time to be announced).

On the other hand...
When I have free time it will invite distractions such as by marking my adium status as available. 

How does tracking work?
Without any configuration, Self-Imposed Structure requires you to remember to switch between work and free state.  However, the App Tracker plugin can be configured to decide if you are working or playing based on what applications are in the foreground at any time.  In my case, I set Xcode and Interface Builder as "work" apps and whenever I switch to these products Self-Imposed Structure tracks the time spent as work.  If I switch to other applications such as games or QuickTime or Adium the plugin will switch Self-Imposed Structure  to free-time mode.

The one slightly tricky application is the web browser because the browser is often very necessary for work e.g. as a programmer I am constantly needing to look up bug reports, API documents, and other bits of software related information. But at the same time the browser provides the ever present temptation to check out a buddy on facebook or check the score of a game at espn.go.com and the short, well-intentioned visit suddenly becomes an hour of youtube surfing that you will never get back.  The current suggested approach is to use two browsers one for fun and one for work.  My work browser is firefox that has been configured with the LeechBlock plugin so that all my known distracting URLs are blocked.

Status Reports made Easy (easier anyway)
Because Self-Imposed Structure accesses your calendar,task lists and your actual time logged on work, it just makes sense that ought to be able to help you with status reports.  For a given time period, you can get a report of all your completed task-list items as well as your work hours logged by project or by task. (This is not yet implemented, however you can get a bar chart showing work time logged vs work time goals and you can get a pie chart of work-time broken out by task.) 